Design document for reading status properties of other resources (#2489)
Azure/azure-service-operator: docs/hugo/content/design/ADR-2022-09-Reading-Status-Properties-Of-Resources.md

```

This results in an awkward to use API and prevents ASO from fulfilling its main duty as a way to manage infrastructure as code and deploy things simply with no manual steps. 

It's worth noting that the general problem of reading a value from another resource to use in _this_ resource comes up in more than just the AAD context.

### Options

In all of the proposed solutions, an annotation would need to be added into `azure-arm.yaml` which indicates that the property in question is special. Something like:
```yaml
RoleAssignmentProperties:
  PrincipalId:
    $aadReference: true
```

or (for the more generic proposals)
```yaml
RoleAssignmentProperties:
  PrincipalId:
    $arbitraryReference: true
```

### Option 1: Support a new type similar to ResourceReference, but specifically for AAD references

That would look something like:
```go
// +kubebuilder:object:generate=true
type IdentityReference struct {

    // Name of the identity in Kuberentes
    Name string `json:"name,omitempty"`

    // PrincipalId of the identity in AAD. This is mutually exclusive with Name.
    PrincipalId string `json:"principalId,omitempty"`
}
```

Usage would be something like:

> ```yaml

Author: Did this

    Value string `json:"value,omitempty"`

    Ref *StringReferenceRef `json:"ref,omitempty"`
}

// +kubebuilder:object:generate=true
type StringReferenceRef struct {
    KubernetesResourceReference

    Path string `json:"path,omitempty"`
}

type KubernetesResourceReference struct {
    // Group is the Kubernetes group of the resource.
    Group string `json:"group,omitempty"`
    // Kind is the Kubernetes kind of the resource.
    Kind string `json:"kind,omitempty"`
    // Name is the Kubernetes name of the resource.
    Name string `json:"name,omitempty"`
}
```

Usage would be something like:
```yaml
apiVersion: managedidentity.azure.com/v1beta20181130
kind: UserAssignedIdentity
metadata:
  name: sample-uai
spec:
  location: Germany West Central
  owner:
    name: dev-sample-rg
---
apiVersion: authorization.azure.com/v1beta20200801preview
kind: RoleAssignment
metadata:
  name: 6a2d44f5-57d8-4916-9f46-ff7c9c1b338f
spec:
  location: Germany West Central
  owner:
    name: samplevnet
    group: network.azure.com
    kind: VirtualNetwork
  principalId:
    ref:
      name: sample-uai
      group: manangedidentity.azure.com
      kind: UserAssignedIdentity

>       path: status.principalId

Author: Version isn't required for these because there's only 1 logical entity even if there are N versions of it. We're linking to the logical entity here.

>       path: status.principalId

Reviewer: Worth observing (perhaps in a separate `Implementation` section below `Pros` & `Cons`) that evaluation of an arbitrary path has some challenges - we could code it ourselves, and handle all the edge cases, or take a shortcut 
(perhaps by serialization to JSON and using a query library) at the risk of not having control over some cases.

Reviewer: Also make a note that every ASO resource would have to register for events related to every other ASO resource, resulting in a significant load on the Kubernetes Event system, even for workloads that don't use this feature.

A good principle to reference here is "Pay for Play" - if someone isn't using a particular ASO feature, they shouldn't have to pay very much (if anything) for it's unused presence.

Reviewer: Because there would be literally no restriction on which property a user might reference from another resource's status, it would be possible for one resource to consume a volatile property from another (say, CPU load from a VM).

If a user did this, every reconcile would result in an update to the resource, which might trigger a busy wait loop and a nasty failure mode.

Author: > Worth observing (perhaps in a separate Implementation section below Pros & Cons) that evaluation of an arbitrary path has some challenges - we could code it ourselves, and handle all the edge cases, or take a shortcut
(perhaps by serialization to JSON and using a query library) at the risk of not having control over some cases.

I've just put this into the existing con, as I think it's a con and makes more sense there. I've added `Implementation` as a section in a few other places where there are "notes" on implementation that aren't strictly a pro/con.

3. Risk for privilege escalation, where a user in the namespace that doesn't have permission to read resources of type `X` instead asks ASO to read that resource. Azure then reflects that value back to them in the error message.
4. Uncertain general reconcile behavior. This reference constitutes a dependency on the referenced resource. Does this mean that ideally, the resource holding the reference will be `Watch`-ing the referenced resource and immediately react to changes in its dependencies? Implementing that dynamic watch behavior given the current structure of controller-runtime would be very difficult.

### Option 3: Support reading/writing to a ConfigMap or Secret, and indirect through that

The idea here is that `UserManagedIdentity` would allow exporting a Secret or ConfigMap value, and then the `RoleAssignment` resource would support (optionally) sourcing from that store instead of having the value hardcoded.
The main difference between this and what we have now is for references we can't replace the entire reference with a `SecretReference`, we need a new type like `OptionalSecretReference`:

> We would only opt a select few resource properties into this `OptionalSecretReference` structure. We could (via serialization magic) support new properties adopting this shape in a nonbreaking way, in case there are properties we didn't think

Reviewer: **Task** does this kind of serialization magic in a number of places - one example is around [variables](https://taskfile.dev/usage/#variables) where they can be directly defined:

```
    vars:
      VAR: Hello!
```
or dynamically defined:
```
    vars:
      GIT_COMMIT:
        sh: git log -n 1 --format=%h
```

We can reference the [Task implementation](https://github.com/go-task/task/blob/master/taskfile/var.go) for an approach.

needed this behavior initially but later we decide they do.

```go
type OptionalSecretReference struct {
    Ref *SecretReference `json:"ref,omitempty"`

    Value *string `json:"value,omitempty"`
}
```

Shown here using the existing `operatorSpec` + `secrets` approach, but we could support a `config` (or `exportedConfig`?):
```yaml
apiVersion: managedidentity.azure.com/v1beta20181130
kind: UserAssignedIdentity
metadata:
  name: sample-uai
spec:
  location: Germany West Central
  owner:
    name: dev-sample-rg
  operatorSpec:
    secrets:
      principalId:
        name: uai-secret
        key: principalid
---
apiVersion: authorization.azure.com/v1beta20200801preview
kind: RoleAssignment
metadata:
  name: 6a2d44f5-57d8-4916-9f46-ff7c9c1b338f
spec:
  location: Germany West Central
  owner:
    name: samplevnet
    group: network.azure.com
    kind: VirtualNetwork
  principalId:
    ref:
      name: uai-secret

>       key: principalid

Reviewer: I think we could simplify this and make it more self documenting:
``` yaml
principalId:
  fromConfigmap: uai-secret
  key: principalid
```

Author: Changed this to:
```
    configMap: uai-config  # Reference the config map created above
    key: principalid
```

I think the `from` prefix is relatively superfluous because it exists on a property that is clearly being supplied by the user. For `SecretReference` we don't say `fromName` or something like that we just say `name` and I think it makes sense to follow that pattern here as well since this is probably going to be called `OptionalConfigReference`.

Thoughts?

Reviewer: Happy with that. :+1:

  roleDefinitionReference:
    armId: /subscriptions/00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000/providers/Microsoft.Authorization/roleDefinitions/b24988ac-6180-42a0-ab88-20f7382dd24c
```

Pros:
1. Generic

> 2. Would solve another related problem as well (see [2349](https://github.com/Azure/azure-service-operator/issues/2349) and [2350](https://github.com/Azure/azure-service-operator/issues/2350), that of how a customer pod can access some of these variables.

Author: Yeah this is the general sentiment/agreement.

> 3. Solves the priviledge escalation risk of option 2

Reviewer: Break this out as a separate `Security` section, and cover that it resolves the privilege escalation risk by requiring the source resource (the identity) to opt-in to sharing the property.

Author: Done

Cons:
1. More complicated to implement. Operator would need to make sure to watch the ConfigMap or Secret for changes and trigger reconciliation based on that.

> 

Reviewer: Add in an `Implementation` section and contrast with Option 2, pointing out that the resources will only need to subscribe to configMap events, keeping the load on the Kubernetes events subsystem fairly low.

Author: I've just listed this in `Pros`, as it feels like it fits there better than in the Implementation section. I did add an implementation section here talking about custom serialization/deserialization though.

---
title: '2022-09: Reading Status properties from other ASO resources'
---

## Context

It isn't currently possible to create a `UserManagedIdentity` and use it in the same YAML, because 
usage of it requires knowing its `PrincipalId` which is generated by Azure only when the identity is created.
This is discussed in a variety of issues. See [2435](https://github.com/Azure/azure-service-operator/issues/2435) 

> and [2350](https://github.com/Azure/azure-service-operator/issues/2350) for example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and [2350](https://github.com/Azure/azure-service-operator/issues/2350) for two examples.
```

> This is also somewhat related to [2474](https://github.com/Azure/azure-service-operator/issues/2474) as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is also somewhat related to [2474](https://github.com/Azure/azure-service-operator/issues/2474).
```

The following example highlights the problem:
```yaml
apiVersion: managedidentity.azure.com/v1beta20181130
kind: UserAssignedIdentity
metadata:
  name: sample-uai
spec:
  location: Germany West Central
  owner:
    name: dev-sample-rg
---
apiVersion: authorization.azure.com/v1beta20200801preview
kind: RoleAssignment
metadata:
  name: 6a2d44f5-57d8-4916-9f46-ff7c9c1b338f
spec:
  location: Germany West Central
  owner:
    name: samplevnet
    group: network.azure.com
    kind: VirtualNetwork
  principalId: <NOT YET KNOWN>  # Problem!!
  roleDefinitionReference:
    armId: /subscriptions/00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000/providers/Microsoft.Authorization/roleDefinitions/b24988ac-6180-42a0-ab88-20f7382dd24c
```

This results in an awkward to use API and prevents ASO from fulfilling its main duty as a way to manage 
infrastructure as code and deploy things simply with no manual steps. 

It's worth noting that the general problem of reading a value from another resource to use in _this_ 
resource comes up in more than just the AAD context.

### Options

> In all of the proposed solutions, an annotation would need to be added into `azure-arm.yaml` which indicates that the 
> property in question is special. Something like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In all of the proposed solutions, an annotation would need to be added into `azure-arm.yaml` to indicate the 
property in question is special:
```

```yaml
RoleAssignmentProperties:
  PrincipalId:
    $aadReference: true
```

> or (for the more generic proposals)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or, for the more generic proposals:
```

    Name string `json:"name,omitempty"`

    // PrincipalId of the identity in AAD. This is mutually exclusive with Name.
    PrincipalId string `json:"principalId,omitempty"`
}
```

Usage would be something like:
```yaml
apiVersion: managedidentity.azure.com/v1beta20181130
kind: UserAssignedIdentity
metadata:
  name: sample-uai
spec:
  location: Germany West Central
  owner:
    name: dev-sample-rg
---
apiVersion: authorization.azure.com/v1beta20200801preview
kind: RoleAssignment
metadata:
  name: 6a2d44f5-57d8-4916-9f46-ff7c9c1b338f
spec:
  location: Germany West Central
  owner:
    name: samplevnet
    group: network.azure.com
    kind: VirtualNetwork
  principalId:
    name: sample-uai  # References the identity from above by name
  roleDefinitionReference:
    armId: /subscriptions/00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000/providers/Microsoft.Authorization/roleDefinitions/b24988ac-6180-42a0-ab88-20f7382dd24c
```

Pros:

1. Relatively easy to implement
2. Simple to use
3. Can give a good error message if the identity in question doesn't exist

Cons:

1. Not generic. What if some resources require `ClientId` instead of `PrincipalId`? We would need a 
   new type for that.

> ### Option 2: Support a generic resource for reading from other ASO resources Status

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Option 2: Support a generic definition for reading from other ASO resource's Status
```

   all RPs do this). We could mitigate this by putting a section in `status` that has what we resolved
   this to, although doing that will complicate the reconcile pass. Alternatively we could punt on 
   that and see how difficult users find it. Most Azure services probably give details about what value
   was sent, and we could error on empty-string to protect against typos.
3. Actually evaluating the path is tricky. We either need to write custom code to do it, or possibly
   we could use an existing JMESPath library but doing so would require serializing objects to JSON regularly,
   which could get expensive from a performance perspective.
4. Uncertain general reconcile behavior. This reference constitutes a dependency on the referenced 
   resource. Does this mean that ideally, the resource holding the reference will be `Watch`-ing the
   referenced resource and immediately react to changes in its dependencies? Implementing that 
   dynamic watch behavior given the current structure of controller-runtime would be very difficult. In the worst
   case it would mean every ASO resource having a watch on every other resource.

> Security:
> 1. Risk for privilege escalation, where a user in the namespace that doesn't have permission to read resources of type 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Security:
1. Risk for privilege escalation, where a user in the namespace that doesn't have permission to read resources of type 

```

   `X` instead asks ASO to read that resource. Azure then reflects that value back to them in the error message.

### Option 3: Support reading/writing to a ConfigMap or Secret, and indirect through that

<!-- TODO: Expand on serialization trickery -->
<!-- TODO: Implementation notes. For example on the second, how does eventing work? -->

> The idea here is that `UserManagedIdentity` would allow exporting ConfigMap value, and then the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The idea here is that `UserManagedIdentity` would allow exporting `PrincipalId` to a ConfigMap value, and then the 
```

> `RoleAssignment` resource would support (optionally) sourcing from that store instead of having the value hardcoded.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`RoleAssignment` resource would support (optionally) reading from that store instead of having a hardcoded value.
```

we want to promote to having this behavior after the resource is released.

```go
// TODO: This type will support custom JSON serialization and deserialization to accept plain strings or a more 
// TODO: complicated structure (for when using as a reference). Type may change in shape in actual implementation,
// TODO: this is just an example
type OptionalConfigReference struct {
    Ref *ConfigReference `json:"ref,omitempty"`

    Value *string `json:"value,omitempty"`
}
```

```yaml
apiVersion: managedidentity.azure.com/v1beta20181130
kind: UserAssignedIdentity
metadata:
  name: sample-uai
spec:
  location: Germany West Central
  owner:
    name: dev-sample-rg
  operatorSpec:  
    configs:  # Export the value as a configmap entry
      principalId:
        name: uai-config
        key: principalid
---
apiVersion: authorization.azure.com/v1beta20200801preview
kind: RoleAssignment
metadata:
  name: 6a2d44f5-57d8-4916-9f46-ff7c9c1b338f
spec:
  location: Germany West Central
  owner:
    name: samplevnet
    group: network.azure.com
    kind: VirtualNetwork
  principalId:

>     configMap: uai-config  # Reference the config map created above

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    configMap: uai-config  # Reference the config map value exported above
```

    key: principalid
  roleDefinitionReference:
    armId: /subscriptions/00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000/providers/Microsoft.Authorization/roleDefinitions/b24988ac-6180-42a0-ab88-20f7382dd24c
```

Pros:
1. Generic
2. Would solve related problems where customers want access to these variables in their pods as well. See: 

>    1. [2349](https://github.com/Azure/azure-service-operator/issues/2349)
>    2. [2350](https://github.com/Azure/azure-service-operator/issues/2350)
>    3. [2317](https://github.com/Azure/azure-service-operator/issues/2317).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   1. [#2349](https://github.com/Azure/azure-service-operator/issues/2349) - Access serviceBusEndpoint in ServiceBus namespace
   2. [#2350](https://github.com/Azure/azure-service-operator/issues/2350) - Export configuration from status
   3. [#2317](https://github.com/Azure/azure-service-operator/issues/2317) - Export clientId from UserAssignedIdentity
```

3. Solves the privilege escalation risk of option 2
4. Resources only need to watch ConfigMap, as opposed to "all other ASO resources" as in option 2.

Cons:
1. More complicated to implement. Operator would need to make sure to watch the ConfigMap for changes and 

>    trigger reconciliation based on that.

Reviewer: More complicated than Option 1, but less so than Option 2.

#### Implementation

For doing dynamic serialization, see the [go-task](https://github.com/go-task/task/blob/master/taskfile/var.go) example
which does this.

## Decision

We will go with Option 3, using `ConfigMaps` and `OptionalConfigReference`. This is the most flexible option and
solves the most user requests while also limiting downsides.

## Status

> Proposed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Agreed. Implementation pending.
```

😁
